add guide for R language (#19787)
docker/docs: content/language/r/develop.md

---
title: Use containers for R development
keywords: R, local, development
description: Learn how to develop your R application locally.
---

## Prerequisites

Complete [Containerize a R application](containerize.md).

## Overview

In this section, you'll learn how to set up a development environment for your containerized application. This includes:

- Adding a local database and persisting data
- Configuring Compose to automatically update your running Compose services as you edit and save your code

## Get the sample application

You'll need to clone a new repository to get a sample application that includes logic to connect to the database.

Change to a directory where you want to clone the repository and run the following command.

```console
$ git clone https://github.com/mfranzon/r-docker-dev.git

> ```

Reviewer: Can we use the same repository throughout the guide? So users don't have to clone two different ones. The `r-docker-dev` repository could be used from the beginning IMO, just comment out the compose parts and delete the db secret.

Author: You are right! I have add more information about the `src_db/` folder

## Add a local database and persist data

You can use containers to set up local services, like a database. In this section, you'll update the `compose.yaml` file to define a database service and a volume to persist data.

In the cloned repository's directory, open the `compose.yaml` file in an IDE or text editor. 

In the `compose.yaml` file, you need to uncomment all of the database instructions. In addition, you need to add the database password file as an environment variable to the server service and specify the secret file to use .

> The following is the updated `compose.yaml` file.

Reviewer: The db lines weren't commented out in the compose.yaml in the repository

Author: I commented the lines in the `compose.yaml`

```yaml {hl_lines="7-36"}
services:
  shiny-app:
    build:
      context: .
      dockerfile: Dockerfile
    ports:
      - 3838:3838
    environment:
      - POSTGRES_PASSWORD_FILE=/run/secrets/db-password
    depends_on:
      db:
        condition: service_healthy
    secrets:
      - db-password
  db:
    image: postgres
    restart: always
    user: postgres
    secrets:
      - db-password
    volumes:
      - db-data:/var/lib/postgresql/data
    environment:
      - POSTGRES_DB=example
      - POSTGRES_PASSWORD_FILE=/run/secrets/db-password
    expose:
      - 5432
    healthcheck:
      test: [ "CMD", "pg_isready" ]
      interval: 10s
      timeout: 5s
      retries: 5
volumes:
  db-data:
secrets:
  db-password:
    file: db/password.txt
```

> **Note**
>
> To learn more about the instructions in the Compose file, see [Compose file
> reference](/compose/compose-file/).

Before you run the application using Compose, notice that this Compose file specifies a `password.txt` file to hold the database's password. You must create this file as it's not included in the source repository.

> In the cloned repository's directory, create a new directory named `db` and inside that directory create a file named `password.txt` that contains the password for the database. Using your favorite IDE or text editor, add the following contents to the `password.txt` file.

Reviewer: This directory already existed so let's make sure we delete it from the template/starter repo

## Overview

In this section, you'll learn how to set up a development environment for your containerized application. This includes:

- Adding a local database and persisting data
- Configuring Compose to automatically update your running Compose services as you edit and save your code

## Get the sample application

You'll need to clone a new repository to get a sample application that includes logic to connect to the database.

Change to a directory where you want to clone the repository and run the following command.

```console
$ git clone https://github.com/mfranzon/r-docker-dev.git
```

## Configure the application to use the database

To try the connection between the Shiny application and the local database you have to modify the `Dockerfile` changing the `COPY` instruction:

```diff
-RUN src/ .
+RUN src_db/ .
```

## Add a local database and persist data

You can use containers to set up local services, like a database. In this section, you'll update the `compose.yaml` file to define a database service and a volume to persist data.

In the cloned repository's directory, open the `compose.yaml` file in an IDE or text editor. 

> In the `compose.yaml` file, you need to uncomment all of the database instructions. In addition, you need to add the database password file as an environment variable to the server service and specify the secret file to use .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `compose.yaml` file, you need to un-comment the properties for configuring the database. You must also mount the database password file and set an environment variable on the `shiny-app` service pointing to the location of the file in the container.
```

Author: Thank you! Looks fine for me!

The following is the updated `compose.yaml` file.

> ```yaml {hl_lines="7-36"}

Reviewer: Highlighting is off here but I don't think we need it, so lets just drop it

````suggestion
```yaml
````

Author: My bad, that was a leftover, thank you!
